Consider these two coordinate frames, frame
A and frame B. They are both right-handed
coordinate frames.
And the problem we’re trying to solve is
how do we describe the rotation of frame B
with respect to frame A. Imagine we could
pick up frame A and rotate it in space so
that its axes were parallel to those of frame
B. How do we do that?
Well, a very famous Swiss mathematician, Leonhard
Euler, came up with what’s called the Rotation
Theorem.
It states that two three-dimensional coordinate
frames are related by a sequence of elementary
rotations such as those about the x-axis,
the y-axis, the z-axis.
We need to apply no more than three of those,
but the rotations in this sequence need to
be about different axes; that is we’d rotate
about x-axis, then the y-axis, then maybe
the x-axis again or maybe about the z-axis.
So any rotation can be expressed in terms
of no more than three rotations as long as
those three rotations are consecutively about
different axes.
Let’s demonstrate this Rotation Theorem.
Here, I have my world reference frame and
here I have a coordinate frame that has got
an arbitrary orientation in space.
And so, the Rotation Theorem says that I should
be able to take this coordinate frame and
with simply three elementary rotations achieve
an orientation like this.
So, I’m going to take a copy of that world
reference frame.
And, first thing I’m going to do is to rotate
it a little bit around the x-axis.
Then, I’m going to rotate it a little bit
around the y-axis, and then I’m going to
rotate it a bit around the z-axis.
And if I pick this axis up and put it in here,
we’ll see that it now has a roughly the
same orientation as the blue frame that I
started with.
So, let’s write down all the possible sequences
of rotation, where we apply this caveat that
no two successive rotations are about the
same axis.
In fact, there are two of them and I’ve
written them all down here.
These rotations fall into two groups and the
group shown here are referred to as Euler
angles.
And, they are the ones where there are two
rotations about the same axis.
The first one is rotation about X, then Y,
then X again.
Well, this one over here is Y, then Z, then
Y again.
So, in the Euler angle group, a particular
axis will appear twice, but not twice consecutively.
This particular group; rotation around Z,
then around Y, and then around Z is quite
commonly called Euler angles, but in fact
there are six Euler angles.
So, we need to be very, very careful when
we talk about an angle sequence.
It’s in fact not good enough just to say
Euler angles.
We should be very specific and say ZYZ Euler
angles.
Different engineering communities use different
conventions, and the ZYZ convention is pretty
common in robotics and in aerospace, but there
are other engineering disciplines where they
use different conventions.
Be very, very careful when you just talk about
Euler angles.
Let’s experiment and here we’re talking
about ZYZ sequence Euler angles.
I’m going to use the Toolbox function eul2r,
which takes three angular arguments, the three
Euler angles.
And, I’m just going to give them simple
values: 0.1, 0.
2 and 0.3 radians respectively.
And, here is the resulting rotation matrix
that corresponds to the three Euler angles.
So you can think of this as two alternative
representations for orientation of the coordinate
frame.
We can represent it as a 3 by 3 orthogonal
matrix or we can represent it by three numbers
which are the Euler angles.
I can perform the inverse operation.
I can convert a rotation matrix to Euler angles.
To do that, I use the function tr2eul and
I pass in the rotation matrix which we’ve
just computed.
And here we have the Euler angles.
So I can convert Euler angles to a rotation
matrix, a rotation matrix back to Euler angles.
Let’s have a look at a slightly different
case where the middle Euler angle is a negative
number and the result is rotation matrix.
It’s a different rotation matrix to the
one we had before because it’s a different
set of Euler angles.
Now I’ll convert this rotation matrix back
to Euler angles.
And we’ll see that the Euler angles that
we end up with are not the Euler angles that
we started with.
So this is another important consideration
when we look at representing orientation in
terms of these three-angle sequences: that
they are not unique, but they are two different
sets of Euler angles which result in exactly
the same rotation matrix.
And just to verify that that is the case,
I’m going to convert this different set
of Euler angles to a rotation matrix.
I’m going to pass that answer in and we
can see the resulting rotation matrix.
And we can see that it is exactly the same
as this one here.
So there are two sets of Euler angles which
result in exactly the same orientation in
space, the same rotation matrix.
The other group of rotation sequences are
commonly called Cardan angles.
These are named after a very famous, or infamous,
Italian character who was a doctor, an astrologer
and a gambler and spent some time in jail
for heresy.
But a very, very inventive person, he invented
the combination lock and he invented the universal
joint, the thing that transmits torque from
an engine in the front of the car to the wheels
at the back of the car.
He also published widely on probability and
was one of the first people to solve cubic
and quartic polynomial equations.
So a very, very bright person.
The Cardan angles involve rotations around
different axes.
So no letter is repeated in the rotation sequence.
The two of them are often referred to as roll,
pitch and yaw angles.
That’s the sequence XYZ or the sequence
ZYX.
And which particular one is used as roll,
pitch, yaw angles depends a bit on the context
of the problem.
Roll, pitch, yaw angles are a really common
convention for orientation of bodies in three-dimensional
space.
We have the x-axis pointing forward and so
the roll angle is rotation around the x-axis.
So that’s the first rotation that we do.
Now we perform a rotation around the y-axis
and that’s referred to as pitch.
So that’s this sort of motion.
And then after that rotation, we do a rotation
around the z-axis and we refer to that as
yaw motion.
So roll, pitch, yaw description of attitude
is a rotation around the x-axis, then around
the y-axis, and then around the z-axis.
A way to demonstrate this principle of three
consecutive rotations is with this mechanism,
a thing called a Gimbal mechanism.
So, there are two coordinate frames here.
We have the world reference coordinate frame
here, the big red frame.
And, we have a smaller coordinate frame in
the middle here.
Now, we can make a rotation around the x-axis,
which is a motion like this.
We can rotate around the y-axis, which is
a rotation like this.
And, we can rotate around the z-axis.
So, I can put this inner coordinate frame
at any orientation that I like and the gimbals
will find the appropriate angles to allow
that to happen.
So this demonstrates very clearly shows that any
orientation of this inner frame can be achieved
by arbitrary choice of three rotation angles
around the x, y, and z-axis.
Let’s have a look at some roll, pitch, yaw
angles in practice.
This is a schematic diagram of NASA’s lunar
module from the late ’60s and early ’70s.
We can see the coordinate frames indicated
on here.
We can see that they define roll as rotation
around the z-axis which is toward the front
of the vehicle and they have defined yaw as
being around the x-axis which is the vertical
axis for this particular vehicle.
The MATLAB functions for roll, pitch, yaw
angles are very similar to those for Euler
angles.
We used the function rpy2r and we pass in
the roll, pitch, yaw angles.
I’ve just made up some simple numbers here.
The roll angle is 0.1
radians.
The pitch angle is 0.2 radians.
And the yaw angle is 0.3 radians.
And this is the resulting orthogonal rotation
matrix.
Once again, there is an inverse function.
So tr2rpy, and I pass in the rotation matrix
and the result are roll, pitch, yaw angles,
the same as those that I started with.